---
cover-image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/GTIF-Austria/public-assets/refs/heads/main/assets/thumbnails/klien_data/Energy%20Planning%20-%20Electricity.jpg

domain: Energy Transition
tags: KLIEN,renewable energy, energy potential,energy technology,energy planning,electricity
provider: AIT Center for Energy,Energiewerkstatt,Umweltbundesamt
---

# Comparison of Grid Capacities and Renewable Energy Potentials

## Motivation 

<p style="text-align: justify;"/> In practical terms, the available power grid at a specific site often represents a hurdle for the enhanced uptake of renewable energies in the electricity sector. The core objective of this task is to explore the possibilities of merging information on realisable renewable energy potentials for electricity supply with other data sources that reflect such constraints in the underlying power grid. While the individual analyses for renewable electricity (e.g. wind, photovoltaics) provide valuable insights into each technology, an integrated perspective that sheds light on that aspect was missing. 

<p style="text-align: justify;"/> This comparative representation, targeting the electricity sector, was therefore developed to highlight the diversity of renewable energy sources, their spatial distribution, and to merge that with available information on the status of the high voltage power grid. This combined perspective equips planners and policymakers with the information needed to understand the relative contributions of different technologies and to identify suitable deployment pathways across national, regional, and municipal levels. 

## Aim 

<p style="text-align: justify;"/> The aim of this comparative visualisation is to explore the possibilities of merging information on realisable renewable energy potentials for electricity supply with other data sources that reflect such constraints in the underlying high-voltage power grid, here limited to the distribution level. 
<p style="text-align: justify;"/> More precisely, the visualisation allows for comparing applicable energy potentials for photovoltaics (PV) and wind power with the reported distribution grid capacities, depicted at the level of about 400 Austrian substation districts. Data on energy potentials include the current status (2024), realisable potentials for future years (2030 & 2040) and the technical potential. Grid data informs on the current use (booked capacity) and the available free capacities, as reported on Verfügbare Netzanschlusskapazitäten - EbUtilities (status: 15 January 2026). The visualisation contains information on the following parameters:

* <p style="text-align: justify;"/> Grid Capacity for corresponding substations, in MVA 

* <p style="text-align: justify;"/> Capacity (C): Installed capacity of PV and wind power plants, in MWel

* <p style="text-align: justify;"/> Energy (E): Annual electricity generated by PV and wind power plants in GWhel per year

<p style="text-align: justify;"/> By bringing these renewable electricity potentials and the information on the grid capacities together in a unified analytical view, the visualization directly supports energy planning activities and demonstrates how advanced geodata can form a robust basis for strategic decision making at various geographical scales. 

## Method 

<p style="text-align: justify;"/> The comparative assessment is based on the harmonized outputs of the study Renewable Energy Potentials in Austria for 2030 and 2040, which provided geodata on energy potentials of multiple renewable energy sources. Data on the high-voltage power grid informs on the current use (booked capacity) and the available free capacities in the Austrian distribution grid, as reported on Verfügbare Netzanschlusskapazitäten - EbUtilities (status: 15 January 2026). These datasets were integrated into a common methodological and spatial framework to allow direct comparison between both data sources.  

## About 

<p style="text-align: justify;"/> The underlying study, “Renewable Energy Potentials in Austria for 2030 and 2040,” was conducted on behalf of the Climate and Energy Fund and was financed with appropriations from the former Federal Ministry for Climate Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and Technology (BMK). It was carried out under the leadership of AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH (AIT), together with the Environment Agency Austria (UBA), Vienna University of Technology (TU Wien), AEE – Institute for Sustainable Technologies (AEE INTEC), and Energiewerkstatt. 
<p style="text-align: justify;"/> Complementary to renewable supply potentials, data on available grid capacities in the Austrian distribution grid is taken from Verfügbare Netzanschlusskapazitäten - EbUtilities (status: 15 January 2026).


<p style="text-align: justify;"/> AIT acts as provider for this service and largely builds on data provided by UBA and Energiewerkstatt as well as Verfügbare Netzanschlusskapazitäten - EbUtilities.

<p style="text-align: justify;"/> EOX complements with its IT expertise, acting as host and front-end expert.
